feat: add how-to for repository management using debarchive (#268)
canonical/landscape-documentation: docs/tutorials/mirror-and-publish-a-repository.md

Reviewer: I'll go through and provide more specific suggestions, but basically the differentiation that's happening here is the guide in this PR is more of an opinionated, end-to-end guide walking users through the entire workflow from a fresh deployment to getting a package on a client

And the existing doc is more of a general how-to guide to use the web portal for repo management, although it doesn't really put the steps in order/in context of a certain user scenario or the rest of their deplyoment/use case

Reviewer: Also in general - remove the framing/wording of this being a tutorial or learning experience

Reviewer: The existing how-to guide should also link back here - you can use similar framing as I suggested [in an earlier comment](https://github.com/canonical/landscape-documentation/pull/268/changes#r3502159894)

And presumably the [disk space requirements](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/landscape/how-to-guides/repository-mirrors/manage-repositories-in-the-web-portal-2604/#disk-space-requirements) should also be included?

---
myst:
  html_meta:

>     description: "A hands-on tutorial that walks you through mirroring an Ubuntu repository with Landscape's Deb Archive service, publishing it to S3, and installing a package on a client."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    description: "A hands-on tutorial that walks you through mirroring an Ubuntu repository with Landscape's Debarchive service, publishing it to S3, and installing a package on a client."
```

---

> (tutorial-deb-archive-mirror)=

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(tutorial-debarchive-mirror)=
```
Trying to standardize on the one-word spelling. I'm not going to tag every spot in this diff, but please look it over.

# Mirror and publish a repository with Deb Archive

> See also: {ref}`explanation-repo-mirroring-2604`

> In this tutorial, you'll use Landscape's Deb Archive service to mirror part of the Ubuntu archive, publish it to an Amazon S3 bucket, and configure a client machine to install packages from your published copy. Along the way, you'll see how the pieces of repository management in Landscape fit together: a *mirror* (your copy of an upstream repository), a *publication target* (where the copy is stored), a *publication* (which connects the two), and a *repository profile* (which tells your clients to use it).

Reviewer 2: Debarchive is kind of an implementation detail, or we treat it as one in other docs. Try to mention it as little as possible, as the actual actions happen in "Landscape" (meaning the UI).

> You'll mirror with **signatures preserved**, meaning Landscape keeps the original Ubuntu signing information intact. This keeps the tutorial simple: because your client machine already trusts the Ubuntu archive's signing key, you won't need to manage any GPG keys yourself.

Reviewer 2: Do we consider signature-preserved the base case then? It's a little janky still so idk if it's the best, plus it doesn't demonstrate using GPG keys, which I think is important to highlight vs simplicity. Open to discuss it.

This tutorial creates a *learning* setup so you can see the full workflow end to end. When you're ready to manage repositories, see {ref}`how-to-manage-repos-web-portal-2604`.

Completing this tutorial should take approximately 30 minutes, plus time for the repository to publish.

## What you'll do

- Create an S3 publication target.
- Create a signature-preserving mirror of an Ubuntu repository.
- Publish the mirror to your target.
- Point a client machine at the published repository with a repository profile.
- Install a package on the client from your own mirror.

## Prerequisites

Before you start, make sure you have:

- A **Landscape Server 26.04 LTS (or later)** deployment with Deb Archive. If you don't have one yet, follow: {ref}`Getting started with Landscape <getting-started-with-landscape>` and {ref}`Set up Deb Archive <how-to-debarchive-repository-management>`.
- At least one **registered client machine** running Ubuntu.

> - An **Amazon S3 bucket** that you can write to, along with its region and a pair of AWS access keys. Any S3-compatible object store (such as MinIO) also works.

Reviewer 2: MinIO is technically deprecated (AIStor is the new name - it's the same thing but, *AI*) so we probably shouldn't mention it here.

## Step 2: Create a signature-preserving mirror

Next, you'll create a **mirror**: Landscape's own copy of an upstream Ubuntu repository. You'll preserve the upstream signatures so your client can verify packages against Ubuntu's existing signing key.

1. From the sidebar, navigate to **Repositories** > **Mirrors**.
1. Click **Add mirror**.
1. In the **Name** field, enter `tutorial-mirror`.
1. In the **Source type** dropdown menu, select **Ubuntu archive**.
1. Leave the **Source URL** at its default value. This points at the Ubuntu archive.
1. Select the **Preserve upstream signing key** checkbox. This is the setting that keeps Ubuntu's original signatures intact. Notice that, once you select it, package filtering is no longer offered: a signature-preserving mirror is a faithful pass-through of the upstream repository, so it can't be filtered.
1. Under **Mirror contents**, choose what to mirror:
    - **Distribution**: `noble`
    - **Components**: `main`
    - **Architectures**: `amd64`
1. Click **Add mirror** to create the mirror.

> You've now defined a mirror, but it hasn't pulled any packages yet. For a signature-preserving mirror, Landscape fetches the upstream packages when you publish, which you'll do next.

Reviewer 2: This may change in the future - I would _like_ it to change in the future. This is why I suggested using a non-signature-preserving mirror for the tutorial.

## Step 3: Publish the mirror

A **publication** connects your mirror to your publication target and makes the repository available. Publishing it is what actually writes the repository into your S3 bucket.

1. From the sidebar, navigate to **Repositories** > **Publications**.
1. Click **Add publication**.
1. In the **Publication name** field, enter `tutorial-publication`.
1. In the **Source type** dropdown menu, select **Mirror**.
1. In the **Source** dropdown menu, select `tutorial-mirror`.
1. In the **Publication target** dropdown menu, select `tutorial-target`.
1. In the **Architectures** dropdown menu, select `amd64`.
1. Notice that there's no **Signing GPG key** field and that the distribution is fixed. Because you preserved the upstream signatures, Landscape doesn't re-sign anything, so there's nothing for you to configure here.
1. Click **Add publication** to create and publish.
1. From the **Publications** list, find `tutorial-publication`, click its actions menu, and select **Republish** to start the publishing process.

> Landscape now copies the upstream packages and writes a complete APT repository into your S3 bucket. Mirroring `noble main` for `amd64` involves a fair amount of data, so this step takes some time and disk space. When it finishes, your repository is live in the bucket and ready for clients.

Reviewer 2: We may want to do a smaller mirror, like `noble-backports` or something… just to avoid it taking forever and using up hundreds of GBs of their bucket.

noble-backports amd64 (all components) is approximately 700 MiB. Just universe is less than a quarter of that.

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "A hands-on tutorial that walks you through mirroring an Ubuntu repository with Landscape, publishing it to S3, and installing a package on a client."
---

(tutorial-mirror-and-publish-a-repository)=

> # Mirror and publish a repository

Reviewer: "How to set up an end-to-end repository mirroring workflow (26.04 and later)" ? 
or
"How to set up repository mirroring end-to-end (26.04 and later)" ?
or something else? I suggested these to differentiate between the web portal guide

And then the intro can be more upfront that this guide is about setting up repository mirroring from a fresh deployment to the actual package on a client. It uses an opinionated setup with Amazon S3 (and whatever else), although the steps still generally apply to other configurations. For a broader set of repository management tasks, see [the web portal guide].

> See also: {ref}`explanation-repo-mirroring-2604`

In this tutorial, you'll use Landscape to mirror part of the Ubuntu archive, publish it to an Amazon S3 bucket, and configure a client machine to install packages from your published copy. Along the way, you'll see how the pieces of repository management in Landscape fit together: a *mirror* (your copy of an upstream repository), a *publication target* (where the copy is stored), a *publication* (which connects the two), and a *repository profile* (which tells your clients to use it).

> Landscape will **re-sign** the mirrored repository with your own GPG key. You'll generate a signing key pair during the tutorial: Landscape uses the private key to sign your published repository, and your client uses the matching public key to verify packages.

Reviewer: I gave some guidance [in a previous comment](https://github.com/canonical/landscape-documentation/pull/268/changes#r3502183030) about how to re-frame the intro. Can the information here be refactored into a "Background" section? (how the pieces relate and the re-signing part - or put how the pieces relate in the intro, and have a "Background: Repository signing" section)

The re-signing part feels out of place to me here, although maybe that'll be easier to explain in a dedicated Background section. It's confusing to me because there isn't really context that brings the user to that knowledge (e.g., I don't even know what signing a repo means and now we're already talking about "re"signing!?)

Something structured more like:
_Client machines need to verify repositories via a signing key (GPG key) because of XYZ. When you publish repositories with Landscape, you can either preserve the upstream signing key or publish your own. This guide uses a re-signed publication, which means you need to provide your own key [maybe give some context here too if there's a reason for the re-sign?]_

but change that as necessary because I don't know if that's right :D but I wanted to provide an example structure / show something that could scaffold this information better

This tutorial creates a *learning* setup so you can see the full workflow end to end. When you're ready to manage repositories, see {ref}`how-to-manage-repos-web-portal-2604`.

> Completing this tutorial should take approximately 30 minutes, plus time for the mirror to sync and publish.

Reviewer: These can be removed

## What you'll do

- Create an S3 publication target.
- Create a mirror of an Ubuntu repository and sync it.
- Generate a signing key and publish the mirror to your target.
- Point a client machine at the published repository with a repository profile.

> - Install a package on the client from your own mirror.

Reviewer: This also shouldn't be needed - it should be clear enough from the intro and the sidebar table of contents

## Prerequisites

Before you start, make sure you have:

> - A **Landscape Server 26.04 LTS (or later)** deployment with repository management available. If you don't have one yet, follow: {ref}`Getting started with Landscape <getting-started-with-landscape>` and {ref}`Set up Debarchive with Landscape <how-to-debarchive-repository-management>`.

Reviewer: Link to an install guide for 26.04, or you could link to the actual install landing page

I'd also note if they're on a pre-26.04 version, they'll need to upgrade (and link the upgrade guide)

I.e., just don't link to the tutorial

- At least one **registered client machine** running Ubuntu.

> - An **Amazon S3 bucket** that you can write to, along with its region and a pair of AWS access keys. Any S3-compatible object store (such as AIStor) also works.

Reviewer: I'd flip the framing here - say they need a S3-compatible object store, and this guide uses Amazon S3 as the example

- The bucket must allow your **client machine to read objects**. In this tutorial, the client fetches packages directly from the S3 URL without credentials, so enable public object read on the bucket.

> - The `gpg` command on your workstation to generate a signing key. It's installed by default on Ubuntu.

Reviewer: "your workstation" - what do you mean? The machine running Landscape Server?

> When you sign in to the web portal, confirm that **Repositories** appears in the sidebar. This is where you'll spend the whole tutorial.

Reviewer: remove this

## Step 1: Create a publication target

> First, you'll tell Landscape *where* your mirrored repository should be stored. This storage location is called a **publication target**. You're creating it first so it's ready when you publish later.

Reviewer: This one (and later steps) should remove the future tense - instead of "you'll tell Landscape", change it to "you need to tell Landscape" or "tell Landscape"

1. From the sidebar, navigate to **Repositories** > **Publication targets**.
1. Click **Add publication target**.
1. In the **Name** field, enter `tutorial-target`.
1. In the **Type** dropdown menu, select **S3**.
1. Fill in the S3 details for your bucket:
    - **Region**: your bucket's region, for example `us-east-1`.
    - **Bucket**: your bucket's name, for example `my-tutorial-bucket`.
    - **AWS access key ID**: your access key ID.
    - **AWS secret access key**: your secret access key.
1. Click **Add publication target**.

> You now have a target named `tutorial-target`. Notice that it's defined independently of any repository, so you could reuse it for other publications later.

Reviewer: The narrative wording of First, Next, "you now have..." is generally fine, but I'd suggest making some general wording changes throughout so it sounds less like someone talking to you, and more like our other how-to guides (e.g., "Notice that it's defined independently of any repository, so you could reuse it for other publications later." sounds more tutorial-like)

This part isn't a huge deal though, and I can give suggestions on the next review if something really stands out (copilot can likely do this well though if you ask it to compare the language with our tutorial)

I like the helpful content and guidance to the user though btw, just referring to the wording

## Step 2: Create and sync a mirror

> Next, you'll create a **mirror**: Landscape's own copy of an upstream Ubuntu repository. Then you'll sync it to download the packages from upstream.

Reviewer: Commenting this here, but this is relevant to all sections, but since this guide is intended to give a clearer picture of what's happening for the user end-to-end - is there additional context that makes sense to add in each section? Maybe not, but something to consider as you update the guide.

1. From the sidebar, navigate to **Repositories** > **Mirrors**.
1. Click **Add mirror**.

> 1. In the **Name** field, enter `tutorial-mirror`.

Reviewer: Here (and noting in case I miss any in other places), I don't think we should be _this_ opinionated when refactoring to a how-to. So instead, it could be like the other guide, "Enter the name of the mirror. For example, noble-backports-mirror."

1. In the **Source type** dropdown menu, select **Ubuntu archive**.
1. Leave the **Source URL** at its default value. This points at the Ubuntu archive.
1. Leave the **Preserve upstream signing key** checkbox cleared. Landscape will re-sign this mirror with your own key when you publish it.
1. Under **Mirror contents**, choose what to mirror:
    - **Distribution**: `noble-backports`
    - **Components**: `main`
    - **Architectures**: `amd64`
1. Click **Add mirror** to create the mirror.

> 

Reviewer: Not sure if this is the case, but if you actually want to be identical with the existing repository mirroring web portal guide, you have the option to use an includes block and reuse the content like [here](https://github.com/canonical/landscape-documentation/blob/main/docs/reuse/repository-disk-space.md?plain=1) - which is called [here](https://github.com/canonical/landscape-documentation/blob/main/docs/how-to-guides/repository-mirrors/manage-repositories-in-the-web-portal-2604.md?plain=1#L23)

I don't like to go crazy with that (e.g., don't have a bunch of include blocks for two lines each), but it's an option if you're duplicating content

The mirror now exists, but it hasn't pulled any packages yet. Sync it to download packages from upstream:

1. From the **Mirrors** list, select `tutorial-mirror`.
1. Click **Update** to start the sync.

> Wait for the sync to finish before continuing. Syncing downloads the upstream packages into Landscape so they're ready to publish.

Reviewer: Any timeframe estimates? Not that it has to be specific, but it can take several hours, right? (I don't actually know how long it takes, but if it's something that can take a super long time for large mirrors, that should be noted here)

First, generate a GPG key pair that Landscape will use to sign the published repository. On your workstation, run:

```bash
gpg --quick-generate-key "Tutorial Signing Key" default default never
gpg --armor --export-secret-keys "Tutorial Signing Key" > signing-private.asc
gpg --armor --export "Tutorial Signing Key" > signing-public.asc
```

The first command creates the key pair. The next two export the private key (which Landscape signs with) and the public key (which your client verifies with) as ASCII-armored text files.

Now create the publication:

1. From the sidebar, navigate to **Repositories** > **Publications**.
1. Click **Add publication**.
1. In the **Publication name** field, enter `tutorial-publication`.
1. In the **Source type** dropdown menu, select **Mirror**.
1. In the **Source** dropdown menu, select `tutorial-mirror`.
1. In the **Publication target** dropdown menu, select `tutorial-target`.
1. In the **Architectures** dropdown menu, select `amd64`.
1. In the **Signing GPG key** field, paste the contents of `signing-private.asc`. Landscape uses this key to sign your published repository.

> 1. Click **Add publication** to create and publish.

Reviewer: Does **Add publication** create _and_ publish? Or does it just create? Your next section also has users republish?

I don't know what's correct, just noticed this discrepancy because the existing doc has a publish/republish section, which makes it seem like **Add publication** doesn't publish.

        ```

    1. In the **GPG key** field, paste the contents of `signing-public.asc`. Your client uses this key to verify packages, since Landscape re-signed the repository with your key rather than Ubuntu's.
1. Use the **Association** options to associate this profile with your registered client.
1. Save the profile.

Landscape applies the new APT source to your client. The configuration is applied once when the client is associated with the profile.

## Step 5: Install a package from your mirror

Now you'll confirm that your client can install a package from your mirror.

On your client machine, refresh the package lists:

```bash
sudo apt update
```

If `apt update` completes without any signature warnings, your client successfully verified your published repository against your signing key.

Next, check that your mirror is a source for a package it contains. Replace `<package>` with a package that exists in `noble-backports`:

```bash
apt-cache policy <package>
```

You should see your S3 bucket's address listed among the sources for the package. Install it to confirm:

```bash
sudo apt install <package>
```

> ## Summary

Reviewer: You could remove the whole summary, or condense it down much tighter to note what the user now should have set up
